<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XV: Whither?</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Whither?</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Six months have passed, and I still go daily walking on the city wall and survey the lunatic asylum, and catch glimpses of the blue sea in the distance. Thence will the new epoch, the new religion, come of which the world is dreaming.</p>
			<p>Gloomy winter is buried, the meadows are green, the trees are in blossom, the nightingale sings in the garden of the observatory, but a wintry sadness still weighs upon our spirits, for so many weird and inexplicable things have happened, that even the most incredulous waver. The general sleeplessness increases, nervous breakdowns are common, apparitions are matters of every day, and real miracles happen. People are expecting something.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>A young man pays me a visit, and asks, “What must one do in order to sleep quietly at night?”</p>
			<p>“Why?”</p>
			<p>“Upon my word, I cannot say, but my bedroom has become a terror to me, and I give it up tomorrow.”</p>
			<p>“Young man, atheist, naturalist, why?”</p>
			<p>“The Devil must be in it! When I open the door of my room at night and enter, someone seizes me by the arms and shakes me.”</p>
			<p>“Then there is someone in your room?”</p>
			<p>“No, when I light a candle there is no one to be seen.”</p>
			<p>“Young man, there is someone who cannot be seen by candlelight!”</p>
			<p>“Who is that?”</p>
			<p>“The invisible, young man! Have you taken sulphonal, bromkali, morphium, chloral?”</p>
			<p>“I have tried all.”</p>
			<p>“And the invisible does not quit the field. Very well! You want to sleep at night, and wish me to tell you how. Listen, young man, I am neither a physician nor a prophet, I am an old sinner, who does penance. Demand therefore neither preaching nor prophecy from an old gallows-bird, who wants all his leisure time to preach to himself. I have also suffered from sleeplessness and paralysis of the arms; I have wrestled eye to eye with the invisible, and finally recovered sleep and health. Do you know how? Guess!”</p>
			<p>The young man guesses my meaning, and casts his eyes down. “You guess it! Go in peace, and sleep well!”</p>
			<p>Yes! I must be silent and let my meaning be guessed, for if I began to play the preaching monk, they would turn their backs on me at once.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>A friend asks me, “Whither are we going?”</p>
			<p>“I cannot say, but as regards myself personally, it seems that the way of the Cross leads me back to the faith of my fathers.”</p>
			<p>“To Catholicism?”</p>
			<p>It appears so. Occultism has played its part, by giving a scientific explanation of miracles and demonology. Theosophy, the forerunner of religion, has fulfilled its function, when it has revived belief in a world-order which punishes and rewards, Karma will be replaced by God, and the Mahatmas will be revealed as the newborn powers, the chastising and instructing spirits. Buddhism in Young France has preached renunciation of the world and the worship of sorrow, which leads direct to Golgotha.</p>
			<p>As regards the homesick longing I feel for the bosom of the Mother Church, that is a long story, which I may summarise as follows:</p>
			<p>When Swedenborg taught me that it is unlawful to quit the religion of one’s ancestors, he said that with reference to Protestantism, which is treason against the Mother Church. Or, to put it better, Protestantism is a punishment inflicted on the barbarians of the North. Protestantism is the Exile, the Babylonish Captivity, but the Return seems near, the Return to the promised land. The immense progress which Catholicism makes in America, England, and Scandinavia seems to point towards a great reconciliation, in which the Greek Church, which has already stretched out her hand towards the West, is not to be forgotten.</p>
			<p>That is the dream of the socialists regarding the restoration of the United States of the West, but taken in a spiritual sense. But I beg you not to think that it is a political theory which takes me back to the Roman Church. I have not sought Catholicism; it has found a place in me, after following me for years. My child, who became a Catholic against my will, has shown me the beauty of a cult which has maintained itself unaltered from the first, and I have always preferred the original to the copy. The considerable time I spent in my child’s native country gave me opportunity to observe and admire the sincerity of the religious life there. I have been also influenced by my stay in the <abbr>St.</abbr> Louis Hospital, and finally by the occurrences of the last few weeks. After contemplating my life, which has whirled me round like some of the damned in Dante’s hell, and after discovering that my existence in general had no other object but to humble and to defile me, I determined to anticipate my executioner, and take in hand my own torture. I determined to live in the midst of sufferings, dirt, and death-agonies, and with this object I prepared to seek a post as attendant on the sick in the <span xml:lang="fr">Hôpital des Frères <abbr>St.</abbr> Jean de Dieu</span> in Paris. This idea occurred to me on the morning of April 29th, after I had met an old woman with a head resembling a skull. When I return home, I find <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Séraphita</i> lying open on my table, and on the right page a splinter of wood, which points to the following sentence: “Do for God what you would do for your own ambitious plans, what you do when you devote yourself to your art, what you have done when you love someone more than Him, or when you have investigated a secret of science! Is God not Science Itself?⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>In the afternoon the newspaper <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">L’Éclair</i> arrived, and, strange to say, the <span xml:lang="fr">Hôpital des Frères <abbr>St.</abbr> Jean de Dieu</span> is twice mentioned in it.</p>
			<p>On May 1st I read for the first time in my life Sar Peladan’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Comment on devient un Mage</i>.</p>
			<p>Sar Peladan, hitherto unknown to me, overcomes me like a storm, a revelation of the higher man, Nietzsche’s Superman, and with him Catholicism makes its solemn and victorious entry into my life.</p>
			<p>Has “He who should come” come already in the person of Sar Peladan. The Poet-Thinker-Prophet⁠—is it <em>he</em>, or do we wait for another?</p>
			<p>I know not, but after I have passed through these antechambers of a new life, I begin on May 3rd to write this book.</p>
			<p><time datetime="1897-05-05">May 5th</time>.⁠—A Catholic priest, a convert, visited me.</p>
			<p><time datetime="1897-05-09">May 9th</time>.⁠—I saw the figure of Gustavus Adolphus in the ashes of the stove.</p>
			<p>On May 14th I read in Sar Peladan: “About the year 1000 <abbr class="era">AD</abbr>. it was possible to believe in witchcraft; today, as the year 2000 <abbr class="era">AD</abbr>. approaches, it is an established fact that such and such an individual has the fatal peculiarity of bringing trouble to those who come into collision with him. You deny him a request, and your dearest friend deceives you; you strike him, and illness makes you keep your bed; all the harm you do to him recoils on you in twofold measure. But, say people, that signifies nothing; ‘chance’ can explain these inexplicable coincidences. Modern determinism sums itself up in the expression ‘chance.’ ”</p>
			<p>On May 17th I read what the Dane, Jorgensen, a convert to Catholicism, says about the Beuron convent.</p>
			<p>On May 18th a friend whom I have not seen for six years comes to Lund, and takes a room in the house where I am staying. Who can picture my emotion when I learn that he also has just been converted to Catholicism? He lends me his breviary (I had lost mine a year ago), and as I read again the Latin hymns and chants, I feel myself once more at home.</p>
			<p><time datetime="1897-05-21">May 21th</time>.⁠—After a series of conversations regarding the Mother Church, my friend has written a letter to the Belgian convent, where he was baptised, requesting them to find a place of refuge for the author of this book.</p>
			<p><time datetime="1897-05-28">May 28th</time>.⁠—There is a vague rumour in circulation that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Annie Besant has become a Catholic.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>I am waiting the answer from the Belgian convent. By the time this book is printed, the answer will have arrived. And then? After that? A new joke for the gods, who laugh heartily when we shed bitter tears.</p>
			<footer>
				<p>Lund, <time datetime="1897-05-03">May 3rd</time>⁠–⁠<time datetime="1897-06-25">June 25th</time>, 1897.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-14" id="noteref-14" epub:type="noteref">14</a></p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
